## Plots Paper


**Figure 1.** Sequences mutated at positions 1163 and 1167 of the S protein. a. The number of mutation events for amino acid replacement D1163Y (light orange) or another D1163 amino acid replacements (dark orange). b. The number of mutation events for amino acid replacement G1167V (light turquoise) or another G1167 amino acid replacements (dark turquoise). Bars coloured in magenta indicate the appearance of both the D1163Y and G1167V amino acid replacements in the same sequences. c.  Maximum-likelihood phylogeny of 10,450 SARS-CoV-2 genomes. The inner circle of the rings represents sequences with amino acid changes in position D1163 of the S protein. The external circle represents sequences with amino acid changes in position G1167 of the S protein. Branches are coloured in magenta for 1163.7, green for clade 20E, and orange for cluster 1163.654. The scale bar indicates the number of nucleotide substitutions per site. d. Temporal distribution and frequency of sequences with variant 1163.7 coloured by geographical origin.

**Figure 2.** The structure of 1163 and 1167 in the pre and post-fusion states of S protein. a. Schematic representation of the S protein. SP. Signal peptide; NTD, N-terminal domain; RBD, receptor-binding domain; SD1-2, subdomains 1 and 2; L-UH, Linker-Upstream helix; FP, fusion peptide; CR, connecting region; HR1, heptad repeat 1; CH-SD3, central helix subdomain 3; BH, β-hairpin; HR2, heptad repeat 2; TM, transmembrane; CD, cytoplasmic domain. Mutations D1163Y and G1167V are indicated in purple and other mutations described in the text in green. b. Cartoon representation (left) of a structural model of pre-fusion membrane-bound trimeric S protein(45). In each subunit the RBD, HR1 and HR2 domains are coloured in different tones (light to dark) of blue, yellow, and green. The N-glycosylation of N1155 and N1176 are shown in stick representation and coloured as the corresponding subunit. Functional and structural regions are marked. A close-view (right) of the N-terminal portion of HR2 where D1163Y and G1167V mutations are found. The side-chains of mutated and hydrophobic residues in the HR2 region are shown in stick representation and coloured as corresponding subunit (mutated residues in lighter tone). c. Cartoon representation (left) of S2 subunit in post-fusion conformation with HR1 and HR2 regions coloured as in b and N-glycosylation around mutation position shown as sticks. A close-view of the region encompassing the mutations (right), showing in stick representation the mutated and hydrophobic residues from the HR2 region shown in panel b. Dotted lines highlight HR2 disordered regions in the Cryo-EM structure. 

**Figure 3.** Comparison of the infectivity and stability of different S genotypes. a, b. The infectivity of VSV particles pseudotyped with each S protein genotype in either Vero (a) or human A549 cells expressing ACE2 and TMPRSS2 (b). The mean and standard deviation of three replicates is plotted. c. Comparison of cycle threshold (Ct) values for the n gene from patients infected with viruses encoding different S protein variants. Data is derived from 2,534 sequences from SeqCOVID consortium. The number of observations (N) analysed for each genotype is indicated. d. The thermal sensitivity of VSV pseudotyped with different S genotypes following incubation at 15 minutes. Data are standardized to the surviving fraction following incubation at 30°C, and the three-parameter log-logistic equation is plotted.  FFU: focus forming units. 

**Figure 4.** Antibody neutralization of 20E and 1163.7 variants. The reciprocal titer at which infection with the 20E S genotype (A222V and D614G) or 1163.7 S genotype (20E plus D1163Y and G1167V) is reduced by 80% (ID80) by sera from individuals infected during the early stage of the pandemic in (a) or during a later stage of the pandemic (b) or from donors vaccinated with the BNT162b2 vaccine (c). The mean and standard error of three replicates is plotted.

**Supplementary Figure 1.** Temporal distribution of mutated samples coloured by region. a. Distribution of S protein amino acid replacement D1163Y over the pandemic (N=1874). b. Distribution of S protein amino acid replacement G1167V over time (N=1708). 

**Supplementary Figure 2.** Maximum-likelihood phylogenies for different PANGO lineages. a. Complete phylogeny coloured by the PANGO lineages. b. Phylogeny of B.53 lineage. The circle represents sequences with D1163 amino acid replacement. c. Phylogeny of B.53 lineage. The inner circle represents sequences with D1163 amino acid replacements, and the external circle represents sequences with G1167 amino acid replacements. d. Phylogeny of A lineage. The circle represents sequences with D1163 amino acid replacements. e. Phylogeny of B.1 and derived lineages. The inner circle represents sequences with D1163 amino acid replacements, and the external circle represents sequences with G1167 amino acid replacements. f. Phylogeny of B.1.1 and derivative D.1 lineages. The inner circle represents sequences with D1163 amino acid replacements, and the external circle represents sequences with G1167 amino acid replacements. g. Phylogeny of B.1.177 and 1163.7. The inner circle represents sequences with D1163 amino acid replacements, and the external circle represents sequences with G1167 amino acid replacements. The scale bar of each indicates the number of nucleotide substitutions per site. The legend of positions 1163 and 1167 is common for all represented panels. 

**Supplementary Figure 3.** Whole genome mutated positions in genotypes with changes 1163Y and 1167V of the S protein. 1163.7 is coloured in magenta and cluster 1163.654 is coloured in orange. Other less frequent genotypes (found in at least 20 sequences) that include changes in S position 1163 and/or 1167 are coloured in turquoise. Cluster 1163.654 is coloured in navy blue. Line width is proportional to the frequency of the genotype. Sites 1163 and 1167 in the S protein are indicated by magenta star symbols, and position 484 in S, whose mutations are associated with antigenicity changes, is indicated by a navy blue star.

**Supplementary Figure 4.** Maximum-likelihood phylogeny of 3,067 genomes belonging to 20I/501Y.V1, rooted with Wuhan reference sequence. Mutated sequences with 1163 and/or 1167 amino acids of the S protein are coloured in the circle. The scale bar indicates the number of nucleotide substitutions per site. The biggest clades are collapsed with isosceles triangles. 

**Supplementary Figure 5.** Maximum-likelihood phylogeny of 3,266 SARS-CoV-2 genomes representing 20E clade rooted with Wuhan reference sequence. Sequences from 1163.7are coloured in magenta, sequences not identified as 1163.7 are coloured in green, and cluster 1163.7.V2 (S protein amino acid replacements: A222V, D614G, E484K, D1163Y, and 141-144Del) is coloured in blue. The scale bar indicates the number of nucleotide substitutions per site. The biggest clades are collapsed, represented as isosceles triangles.

**Supplementary Figure 6.** Neutralization of the different mutated S protein variants by convalescent sera from six individuals infected during the first epidemic wave. The reciprocal titer at which each of the different convalescent sera neutralizes the different variants by 50% is indicated. Plotted are the mean and standard error of (n=3).
